h1. CakePHP

CakePHP is an MVC framework built with support for PHP 4 and PHP 5. The current stable line is 1.3.x, and the current stable version is 1.3.4. It can run on any of the three larger operating systems (Linux, OS X, Windows), as well as on most systems with support for PHP, such as BSD. CakePHP is an Open Source, MIT-licensed framework - meaning one can build commercial products on top of CakePHP - built by volunteer developers in their spare time.

For commercial support, it is currently possible to contact "CakeDC":http://cakedc.com/, a software company that employs 75% of all the CakePHP core developers. There are also many development shops, as well as freelance developers, that use and support CakePHP through monetary donations or release of free and open source code.

CakePHP can be used to create RESTful and SOAP APIs, Social Networks, Project Management Tools, Content Management Systems, as well as many other types of web applications. It's support for Cakeshells means that it may also be used as a command line tool. CakePHP is like any other framework, and provides a stable, tested base upon which an application can be built.

Development is handled on Github at "http://github.com/cakephp/cakephp":http://github.com/cakephp/cakephp, and issue tracking is done using Lighthous at "http://cakephp.lighthouseapp.com/":http://cakephp.lighthouseapp.com/. There is a vibrant Google Groups community at "http://groups.google.com/group/cake-php":http://groups.google.com/group/cake-php and one can almost always find support at "irc://freenode.net/cakephp":irc://freenode.net/cakephp.