h1. Getting Started

h2. Requirements

* HTTP Server (Apache + mod_rewrite recommended)
* PHP 4.3.2 or greater
* GIT (or archived source from the download list)
* SQL Database (MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQL Server, OracleDB, SQLite)

h2. Installing CakePHP

h3. SSH

If installing using GIT, you will need an account Github. It is necessary to generate an ssh key to clone repositories from Github (the below is output from an OS X machine):

<pre><code>$ ssh-keygen
Generating public/private rsa key pair.
Enter file in which to save the key (/Users/cakephp/.ssh/id_rsa): 
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): 
Enter same passphrase again: 
Your identification has been saved in /Users/cakephp/.ssh/id_rsa.
Your public key has been saved in /Users/cakephp/.ssh/id_rsa.pub.
</code></pre>

h3. Git clone

Once your key has been generated, create an account on Github and add your public ssh key (id_rsa.pub) as a key on your account. Then you may issue the following commands:

<pre><code>$ cd ~/Sites
$ git clone git://github.com/cakephp/cakephp
Cloning into cakephp...
remote: Counting objects: 92739, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (17649/17649), done.
remote: Total 92739 (delta 74578), reused 92033 (delta 73969)
Receiving objects: 100% (92739/92739), 13.24 MiB | 1.67 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (74578/74578), done.
</code></pre>

The initial clone may take a few minutes, but will typically be quicker on every successive pull.

h3. Cake Command

It is also possible to add the @cake@ command to the command line by editing your system @$PATH@. On a Unix machine, this will be either in ~/.bash_profile or ~/.bashrc:

@PATH=$PATH:/Users/cakephp/Sites/cakephp/cake/console@

Windows users can add the appropriate @cake.bat@ - located in the same path as above - to their System Path. Please consult a guide to do so for your specific version of Windows OS.

h3. Success

If everything has been correctly installed, typing @cake@ in the command line will result in the following:

<pre><code>Welcome to CakePHP v1.3.3 Console
---------------------------------------------------------------
Current Paths:
 -app: Sites
 -working: /Users/cakephp/Sites
 -root: /Users/cakephp
 -core: /Users/cakephp/Sites/cakephp

Changing Paths:
your working path should be the same as your application path
to change your path use the '-app' param.
Example: -app relative/path/to/myapp or -app /absolute/path/to/myapp

Available Shells:
 acl [CORE]                         bake [CORE]                        i18n [CORE]                     testsuite [CORE]
 api [CORE]                         console [CodeCheck]                schema [CORE]

To run a command, type 'cake shell_name [args]'
To get help on a specific command, type 'cake shell_name help'
</code></pre>

Browsing to @http://localhost/cakephp@ will also result in a styled CakePHP landing page.